





Network Working Group                                           E. Chen
Internet Draft                                                S. Sangli
Expiration Date: June 6, 2012                             Cisco Systems
                                                       December 5, 2011


                      Dynamic Capability for BGP-4
                   draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 6, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 1]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


Abstract

   This document defines a new BGP capability termed "Dynamic
   Capability", which would allow the dynamic update of capabilities
   over an established BGP session. This capability would facilitate
   non-disruptive capability changes by BGP speakers.


1. Introduction

   Currently BGP capabilities [RFC5492] are only advertised in the OPEN
   message during the session initialization. In order to enable a new
   capability or remove an existing capability (such as an Address
   Family support [RFC4760]), an established session needs to be reset,
   which may disrupt other services running over the session.

   This document defines a new BGP capability termed "Dynamic
   Capability", which would allow the dynamic update of capabilities
   over an established BGP session. This capability would facilitate
   non-disruptive capability changes by BGP speakers.


1.1. Specification of Requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2. Dynamic Capability

   The Dynamic Capability is a new BGP capability [RFC5492].  The
   Capability Code for this capability is specified in the "IANA
   Considerations" section of this document.  The Capability Value field
   consists of a list of capability codes (one-octet for each) that
   specify the capabilities that MAY be revised dynamically by the
   remote speaker.

   By advertising the Dynamic Capability to a peer in the OPEN, a BGP
   speaker conveys to the peer that the speaker is capable of receiving
   and properly handling the CAPABILITY message (as defined in the next
   Section) from the peer after the BGP session has been established.









Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 2]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


3. Capability Message

   The CAPABILITY Message is a new BGP message type with type code 6.
   In addition to the fixed-size BGP header [RFC4271], the CAPABILITY
   message contains one or more of the following tuples of capability
   revisions:


               +------------------------------+
               | Init/Ack (1 bit)             |
               +------------------------------+
               | Ack Request (1 bit)          |
               +------------------------------+
               | Reserved (5 bits)            |
               +------------------------------+
               | Action (1 bit)               |
               +------------------------------+
               | Sequence Number (4 octets)   |
               +------------------------------+
               | Capability Code (1 octet)    |
               +------------------------------+
               | Capability Length (2 octets) |
               +------------------------------+
               | Capability Value (variable)  |
               +------------------------------+


   The Init/Ack bit indicates whether a capability revision is being
   initiated (when set to 0), or being acknowledged (when set to 1).

   The Ack Request bit indicates whether an acknowledgment is requested
   (when set to 1), or not (when set to 0) for a capability revision
   being initiated.

   The Reserved bits should be set to zero by the sender and ignored by
   the receiver.

   The Action bit is 0 for advertising a capability, and 1 for removing
   a capability.

   The Sequence Number field can be used by a BGP speaker to match an
   acknowledgment with a capability revision that the speaker initiated
   previously.

   Conceptually the triple <Capability Code, Capability Length,
   Capability Value> is the same as the one defined in [RFC5492], and it
   specifies a capability for which the "Action" shall be applied.




Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 3]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


4. Operation

   A BGP speaker that is willing to receive the CAPABILITY message (for
   one or more capability codes) from its peer SHOULD use the BGP
   Capabilities Advertisement [RFC5492] to advertise the Dynamic
   Capability for these capability codes.

   A BGP speaker MAY send to its peer a CAPABILITY message to initiate
   revisions for one or more capability codes only if these capability
   codes are listed in the Dynamic Capability of the OPEN message
   received from its peer.

   A CAPABILITY message MAY be received only in the Established state.
   Receiving a CAPABILITY message in any other state is a Finite State
   Machine Error as defined in [RFC4271]. A BGP speaker SHOULD reset the
   HoldTimer upon receiving a CAPABILITY message from its peer.

   When a BGP speaker sends a CAPABILITY message to its peer to initiate
   a capability revision, the Init/Ack bit for the capability revision
   in the message MUST be set to 0.  The setting of the Ack Request bit
   is capability specific.  The assignment of the Sequence Number is a
   local matter, but MUST allow the BGP speaker to unambiguously
   identify a capability revision it initiated previously based on the
   Sequence Number carried in the acknowledgment from the peer.

   If the Init/Ack bit is set to 1 for a capability revision in a
   CAPABILITY message received by a BGP speaker, then the BGP speaker
   SHALL treat the capability revision as an acknowledgment of the
   receipt of a capability revision initiated by the BGP speaker.  The
   BGP speaker MUST ignore the Ack Request bit, and SHALL use the
   Sequence Number carried in the capability revision to match with the
   capability revision previously initiated.  The BGP speaker SHALL
   ignore an acknowledgment for a capability revision in which an
   acknowledgment was not requested by the BGP speaker.  If the Sequence
   Number carried in the capability revision does not match any of the
   the Sequence Numbers used in the capability revisions initiated by
   the BGP speaker, then the BGP speaker SHOULD send a NOTIFICATION
   message as specified in the Error Handling section.

   If the Init/Ack bit is set to 0 for a capability revision in a
   CAPABILITY message received by a BGP speaker, then the BGP speaker
   SHOULD first validate the capability code in the message.  If the
   capability code is not listed in the Dynamic Capability advertised by
   the speaker to the peer, the BGP speaker SHOULD send a NOTIFICATION
   message as specified in the Error Handling section. For a valid
   capability code, if the Ack Request bit is set to 1, the BGP speaker
   MUST first send a CAPABILITY message to acknowledge the receipt of
   the capability revision.  The Init/Ack bit in the acknowledgment MUST



Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 4]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


   be set to 1, and all the other fields in the capability revision MUST
   be kept unchanged.

   After receiving a capability revision initiated by a peer, the BGP
   speaker SHALL update the capability previously received from that
   peer based on the Action bit in the message, and then function in
   accordance with the revised capability for the peer.  The BGP speaker
   SHALL ignore such a capbility revision that either results in no
   change to an existing capability, or removes a capability that was
   not advertised previously.  The procedures specified in the "Error
   Handling" section SHOULD be followed when an error is detected in
   processing the CAPABILITY message.

   In order to avoid ambiguities in sending and processing UPDATE
   messages, certain capability revisions may require close coordination
   between the BGP speaker (the Initiator) that initiates the capability
   revisions and another BGP speaker (the Receiver) that receives the
   capability revisions.  The mechanism of acknowledgment defined in
   this document SHALL be used for the revision of such a capability.
   For the Initiator, the capability revision SHALL take effect (for the
   purpose of sending updates) immediately after the capability revision
   is sent, and the capability revision SHALL take effect (for the
   purpose of receiving updates) immediately after an acknowledgment is
   received from the Receiver.  For the Receiver, the capability
   revision SHALL take effect (for the purpose of receiving updates)
   immediately after the capability revision is received from the
   Initiator, and the capability revision SHALL take effect (for the
   purpose of sending updates) immediately after an acknowledgment is
   sent.


5. Error Handling

   This document defines a new NOTIFICATION error code:

     Error Code     Symbolic Name

        7           CAPABILITY Message Error


   The following error subcodes are defined as well:

     Subcode        Symbolic Name

        1           Unknown Sequence Number
        2           Invalid Capability Length
        3           Malformed Capability Value
        4           Unsupported Capability Code



Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 5]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


   If a BGP speaker detects an error while processing a CAPABILITY
   message, it MUST send a NOTIFICATION message with Error Code
   CAPABILITY Message Error. If any of the defined error subcode is
   applicable, the Data field of the NOTIFICATION message MUST contain
   the tuple for the capability revision that causes the speaker to send
   the message.

   If the Sequence Number carried in a capability revision marked as
   acknowledgment does not match any of the the Sequence Numbers used in
   the capability revisions initiated by the BGP speaker, then the error
   subcode is set to Unknown Sequence Number.

   If the Capability Length field in the CAPABILITY message is incorrect
   for a Capability Code, then the error subcode is set to Invalid
   Capability Length.

   If the Capability Value field in the CAPABILITY message is malformed
   (the definition of "malformed" depends on the Capability Code), then
   the error subcode is set to Malformed Capability Value.

   If the Capability Code in the CAPABILITY message is not any of the
   capability codes advertised in the Dynamic Capability by the speaker,
   then the error subcode is set to Unsupported Capability Code.


6. IANA Considerations

   This document defines the CAPABILITY message type for BGP with type
   code 6, and a NOTIFICATION error code and subcodes for the errors in
   a CAPABILITY message.

   This document uses a BGP capability code to indicate that a BGP
   speaker supports the Dynamic Capability.  The capability code 67 has
   been assigned by IANA.


7. Security Considerations

   This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues.












Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 6]





Internet Draft      draft-ietf-idr-dynamic-cap-14.txt           Dec 2011


8. Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Yakov Rekhter, Ravi Chandra, Dino
   Farinacci, Pedro Marques, Chandrashekhar Appanna, Derek Yeung, Bruno
   Rijsman, John Scudder and Jeffrey Haas for their review and comments.


9. Normative References

   [RFC4271] Rekhter, Y., T. Li, and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
   Protocol 4 (BGP-4)," RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4760] Bates, T., Chandra, R., Rekhter, Y., and D. Katz,
   "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 4760, January 2007.

   [RFC5492] Scudder, J. and R. Chandra, "Capabilities Advertisement
   with BGP-4", RFC 5492, February 2009.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


10. Authors' Addresses

   Enke Chen
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: enkechen@cisco.com


   Srihari R. Sangli
   Cisco Systems, Inc.
   170 W. Tasman Dr.
   San Jose, CA 95134

   Email: rsrihari@cisco.com













Chen & Sangli                                                   [Page 7]


